August 31 testing August 31 to to to to to
This is July the 31st and I have the honor and privilege of chatting with Mr. Bernard Richardson, class of 41, about his experiences at Texas A&M.
Mr. Richardson, to begin and introduce yourself to anyone who might listen to this tape or read the transcript,
describe where you grew up, what your family did for a living, what high school you went to, and so forth.
Well, to start with, my name is Bernard and not Bernard.
I was born in Kirbyville, Texas, which is in Jasper County, about 50 miles north of Beaumont.
My father, DC Richardson, David C. Richardson, was a farmer.
I went to a little country school in the community of Mount Union my first five years.
And then the sixth year, when I was in the sixth grade, I started to go into Kirbyville High School.
I finished Kirbyville High School in 1935.
There was only 43 students in my senior class, and we still have a class reunion every year, and we had our 65th this last year at my farm.
After I finished high school, I was not able to go to college because my family was not able to send me.
I had an older brother who was 17 years older than I was.
He told me if I'd save money that he'd match it.
And I wanted to go to A&M bad.
I got a job working at a filling station seven days a week, 12 hours a day for $5 a week.
I stayed at home and the only expense I had was my Texaco uniforms.
I saved four dollars of every five dollars that I made.
One December, just before Christmas, I was washing, had to wash three dump trucks every Sunday morning.
I was washing those dump trucks
And when I got through, I held the hose with my left hand.
I couldn't turn it loose.
It was frozen.
I went in, told the boss that I was quitting.
Well, I went home.
Monday morning he called me, told me, I'll raise you to $6 a week if you come back.
I went back, glad to go back.
And I worked there for almost a year.
Then the government came along
At that time, they was plowing up cotton, playing people not to raise cotton.
I got a job with the government working six days a week for $3.75 a day.
I worked there for about four months, and my brother told me, son, brother, you've either got to go to college or I'm going to call my deal off because you're about to break me.
Well, at the end, about four months, then I had enough money to register at A&M.
What caused you to be, what did you know about A&M?
What led your interest to A&M?
Just following the sports, in the newspaper, Bowman Enterprise.
I'd always wanted to go to A&M and I had played basketball in Kirbyville and when I went to A&M there was two boys from my hometown already there and I as a freshman had to go two days before they did.
I got there in September of 37.
How did you travel over there that first time?
My sister carried me.
My sister, who was several years older than I was, and she had a job, and she had a car, and she carried me, dumped me off at Puryear Hall.
And I was there two days, didn't know a soul, and had to meet the first, my first sergeant met me, and his name was Polanovich.
I'd never heard of anybody by that name.
And he told me, he says, now, Fish Richardson, you are expected to know everybody in the company after a week and know their names and what town they're from.
Well, I was kind of stunned.
I had a Lefkowski, Polanovich, and I had about four more Polacks that I didn't have.
In Jasper County, there wasn't any.
I didn't know how I was ever going to learn to pronounce those names.
Well, about the second day I was there, the two other students from Kirbyville arrived.
I was sitting on the corner of Puryear waiting for them to come in because I knew they was going to be in the same dorm.
When they got there, they came by and they said, Hi, Fitz Richland, and just kept going.
I was never so disappointed in my life to think that they wouldn't even talk to me.
Well, it wasn't long until I saw them again.
They were friendly, and we were friendly all the way through.
I was taking petroleum engineering and mechanical engineering, a five-year course.
How much of that money did you, that you earned, how much did you bring with you to College Station?
I didn't bring any.
I had registered, already registered, and I didn't have any money left.
Oh, do you remember what that first year cost?
No, sir, I do not.
Did your brother match?
Did he keep his?
Yes, sir, he kept it, and he matched.
But, of course, I didn't earn any after that, that he matched.
Describe the campus.
What did it look like when you got there?
Well, I came from Kirbyville, which was a population of a thousand.
So College Station was a big town.
The buildings were big to me.
And everything was strange.
And I didn't know how I was going to get along.
But I managed.
And I hadn't been there long until I got a job setting pins in the bowling alley.
And that was kind of an experience.
That was in the YMCA?
In the YMCA, Mr. Cashin was running it.
Describe Mr. Cashin.
Well, he was a kind of jolly fellow and very friendly.
And I was setting pins one day.
Back those days, there was no mechanical setting.
I had to set the pins down and then push them down.
I was working one day and the fellow bowling and the pins flew out of the, off the alley and up behind me.
And Mr. Cashin was down there almost time the bowling ball was.
But I wasn't hurt.
And after that, I got a job taking up cleaning impressions for Hollick cleaners.
And besides that, I had a candy concession.
And the candy concession was on the honor system.
I had a table out in the hall, in Puryear Hall, ramp one.
And I put the candy out there.
And people come by and either paid for the candy, put the money in, or put an IOU.
And I never lost any money on IOU.
Everybody paid.
And then the last two years that I was there, I worked for the school, I don't know, it's got a name, W-something.
Anyway, I made 25 cents an hour down at the Petroleum Building.
And I painted that fence around the...
where they had the oil rigs that we worked on.
I painted that fence about three times with a one-inch brush with silver paint.
And I managed to get through.
And when I got through A&M, I only owed my brother $1,700 is all I owed him that he had loaned me after I got in school.
Describe your unit, your outfit, and how you as a fish were built.
broken into that unit?
I was in Battery D of the Coast Artillery.
Did y'all have a nickname?
No.
And as a freshman, we had to clean up upperclassmen's rooms.
And when I first got there, we had the upperclassmen made us wash and paint the walls of the dormitories.
And back in those days, they used the board.
And I got my share of the board.
I was, my freshman year, I cleaned up room for Charles Kirkpatrick, who was a baseball catcher on the A&M team.
He was a sophomore.
He used the board on me every morning.
if I woke him up or if I didn't wake him up.
So it didn't make any difference.
I enjoyed it.
It wasn't bad.
And that was a good thing.
I served one year and got three years service in return.
And I enjoyed my freshman year as much as I did any year at A&M.
It wasn't all that bad.
Back those days in the engineering course, I took 22 hours one semester and 21 the other semester my freshman year.
Kids don't think about taking that many hours now.
Were there some teachers you had that first year that were special that you remember warmly?
No sir, not particularly.
I was an awful student in English and I remember
English teachers because I didn't pass that freshman year in English.
But they wasn't bad.
I enjoyed them.
Now you started off majoring in petroleum?
Petroleum mechanical engineering.
And stayed with it all?
Stayed with it all the time.
I have my degree, got my degree in petroleum engineering like seven hours having it in mechanical.
And it was a five-year course and at the end of the fifth year I was, I got my commission at the end of my fourth year.
And at the fifth year, I got a year's deferment, and I didn't quite get that year's deferment.
They called me on April the 10th of 1942 to go into service with, of course, I was a commissioned officer.
And when I went into service, I went into service on the 10th of April, and I went to Camp Wallace for two days and then was transferred to Camp Hewlin, and then on the 19th,
I was on a ship going overseas and we went to Ireland and we trained on British guns for six months in Ireland.
Let's go back to that first year at A&M.
Did you have a special roommate, a special fish old lady?
Yes, I had two, A.J.
Prager and Rex Butler.
Spell Prager.
P-R-A-G-E-R.
A.J.
has passed away this past year, and I haven't heard from Rex in several years.
What was special about your friendship?
Well, it was kind of new to me.
Of course, Rex was just an old farm boy, but A.J.
was a little different.
A.J.
was a Jewish boy, and I had never been around a Jew.
We took up a good acquaintance, and A.J.
was good to me.
A.J.
had money, and I didn't.
And the funny thing about it, we'd go somewhere, and if we had to buy a Coke or ice cream cone or something, A.J.
would buy mine, but he wouldn't buy nobody else's.
Did you all have nicknames for each other?
No, not particularly.
Now, you're a Jewish roommate.
How were Jewish boys treated at A&M then?
Very good, very good.
I enjoyed A.J., and I respected him.
Did you all call each other old lady in the Corps then?
Yes.
Your freshman was your old lady?
Yes, we did.
Describe going to the chow hall and what the routine was for a freshman in the chow hall.
Well, we had, of course, line up out in the street, and we marched to Sabisa Hall for every meal.
And in the mess hall, we was, at that time, every freshman was supposed to go his class number days without any kush.
That was dessert.
In other words, we were supposed to go 41 days without any dessert.
And if you got caught,
You had to start over.
You had to go 41 days from there.
Well, I don't think many of us went 41 days without dessert.
We found a way of getting dessert.
Sometimes the upperclassmen would let you have dessert, providing you'd eat a whole pie at one time.
or sometimes they'd let you have a piece of pie if it was a meringue pie.
If you didn't use a fork, you just had to eat it out of the saucer without any utensils.
But we managed, and we stayed late.
The upperclassmen left the mess hall pretty early, and we stayed late, and we managed to eat our kush.
Did you all ever play any tricks on anybody in the dining hall?
Not many in my outfit they didn't.
On some of their others they did, but mine didn't.
A lot of times we had to bring breakfast back to the upperclassmen.
We had to come out of the mess hall with whatever they had for breakfast and bring it to the upperclassmen that didn't go to breakfast, which wasn't many of them.
And did you have to smuggle it under your shirt, or could you just carry it in your hand?
Well, most of the time we had to smuggle it.
Sometimes we could get by with it.
Did y'all have nicknames for the food and the drink?
Oh, yeah.
Everything had a nickname.
Mention some of them, please.
Well, milk was leche, and bread was... Deal?
And pie was, any dessert was kush, and...
Meat.
Bullneck.
Bullneck was the meat.
Well, you got me now.
I'm thinking.
Mustard was baby.
Yeah, well, I got something I wouldn't want to tell.
But everything had a nickname.
When did you begin to realize that you were making some very special friendships?
Oh, I'd say after I'd been there two weeks.
Did you get homesick?
Yes, because I'd never been away from home.
It was my first adventure from home.
Sure I got homesick.
And to my sorry I missed the first Thanksgiving game, I went home.
And I paid dearly for it.
And when I got home, my mother saw my behind and she threatened to not let me go back.
That was, let's see, in 41, the game was in?
Well, that wasn't 537.
Oh, I mean 37.
The game was in Austin?
I think so, yes.
Now, how did you get back and forth to home?
Oh, you hitchhiked.
We went out in front of the university, and we hitchhiked, and you couldn't, you had to get in line to hitchhike.
Now, if you went downstream, you got penalized.
They call that downstream or upstream either one.
And we took time.
I didn't have any time.
I generally had to catch a ride to Houston as far as I could catch.
And then I had to catch another ride then to Beaumont.
Then from Beaumont home to Kirbyville, which was pretty hard.
About how long did it normally take you to go from College Station to Kirbyville?
Oh, about eight hours.
Describe some of the experiences you remember hitchhiking as an Aggie.
Well, I didn't have them any bad.
All mine was good.
I had one, I might not tell this, I got to Houston one time, was picked up, and a fellow picked me up out on Washington Avenue and was going to carry me across town.
Well, we got about halfway through town and he put his hand over on my leg and started fooling him.
And I told him, I said, stop this car right now and let me out.
And he did.
And that's the only bad experience I ever had.
What about some of the good experiences?
Oh well, every now and then you'd catch a ride, somebody would stop somewhere and buy you something.
Mr. Smith, class of 1898, was a regular traveler on the highway and when he picked somebody up, he took good care of them.
He always had peanuts in his car and he'd give you peanuts.
Tell us, if you remember any more about Mr. Smith, please share that with us.
I met him about 40 years ago.
He was a great old man.
And when we go to our luncheon or anything, where we all got up and
called our name and class number he'd say class 98 that's 1898 and his son Doug Smith who is the class of 37 is a personal friend of mine now and I enjoy Doug Doug's in real bad health right now but I've always enjoyed the Smiths what mr. Smith senior lived in Houston yes what did he do for a profession oh
Well, he owned real estate all over the United States.
And he still does that.
The state does, which Doug has
run the estate and that's been a big job and I understand Doug's son of class of 67 is gonna have to take over and that's gonna be our awful job mr. Smith senior I ask you this with a straight face do you think he cared much about A&M very much yes sir he sure did he was a hundred percent for A&M describe
when you were a freshman, describe a typical class day.
What time did you get up?
What did you do when?
Well, we got up about an hour before breakfast.
Now, that's too far back.
I don't remember what the time of breakfast was.
Anyway, we had to get up.
We had to get up and clean our own room up and clean the upperclassmen room that we had to clean up.
There was generally two freshmen to every upperclassmen room.
And we had to clean and make their bed up and then go to breakfast.
And by the time that was time to go to class.
Now, back in those days, we had classes six days a week.
We went to class on Saturday.
And we was allowed, if you was taking a three-hour course, you could have three cuts, and that's all.
If you didn't, you got knocked in your grades.
And I never missed enough hours to get knocked.
Now, for lunch, you didn't have to fall in.
Did you?
You went on your own to Cebisa?
Didn't have to go as an outfit?
I think we marched.
I don't remember.
I think we marched all three meals.
I remember.
Then in the afternoon, what time did the organized activities begin?
Well, I was always interested in sports, and we had intramural sports.
Most of the time, from the time classes was over until we had to march for dinner, supper you call it, or whatever you want to call it.
We was out playing softball or something.
What was your favorite intramural sport?
Softball and basketball.
Now, back in those days, A&M didn't have much of a basketball team.
We only had, I think our freshman year, two boys that was on scholarship in basketball.
And we all, Lil Demet was a basketball coach, and he had us all, the freshmen that wanted to try out basketball went down to
to the gym, the wire wheel field house, and we got out on the field and we dribbled a ball and shot, and he stood up in the stand and he'd call you up there if he thought you was interested.
The first day of that trial, I was out on the basketball court, and he sent somebody down to call me to come up, and I came up to talk to him.
He says, what's your name?
I said, Richardson.
He says, you're not from Kirbyville, are you?
I said, yes.
He says, sign this boy up.
Kirbyville had played Beaumont High several times in high school basketball, and we always give them a fit.
And at one time, they was all Ritson and Beans.
That was all.
It was on the Kerbable team.
And he remembered that.
And so I went on, and I played freshman basketball.
We didn't let her as a freshman back in those days enumerate.
I enumerated.
I was not on the first team, but I played enough that I won her enumerate.
Who was the freshman coach, basketball coach?
Lil Demers.
Oh, he did both.
He was the basketball coach, yeah.
And the baseball coach.
Where did you all travel to play games?
What teams did you play?
We played most of the Southwest Conference teams.
And then did you play varsity ball the next year?
No, sir.
I went out for just a little practice my sophomore year, and then I decided that I had to give up basketball or give up codem engineer in one of the two, so I gave up basketball.
While we're on sports, you were there when there were some very, very fine football players.
Can you describe some of those men on the football team in those days?
Well, my freshman year, Dick Todd was a senior.
I enjoyed seeing Dick Todd play.
I had followed Dick before I went to A&M, kept it while in the papers.
And Dick was a fellow that I don't care how many men hit him or what,
He always, when he went to the ground, he was on top.
He was never on the bottom.
And then, of course, I was there with the class that won the national championship, Marion Pugh and Odell Herman and that bunch, John Kimbrough.
I really enjoyed the football.
Did you know any of those personally?
Well, I knew them.
I wouldn't say I knew them real good.
I knew them because I was at the gym all the time when they were.
But Tommy Vaughn, I knew Tommy probably better than any of the rest of them.
What were they like as individuals?
Oh, they was good people.
Now, on freshman basketball, I told you we didn't have any scholarships.
Odell Herman and Marion Pugh played basketball.
Odell was the roughest man I ever played against in my life on the basketball court.
And one day I decided I was going to get even with Odell.
And so we was running down the court, and just before we got to the goal, I dropped down on my all fours, and Odell fell over me.
And he busted his head good, and I didn't have no trouble with Odell the rest of the season.
Did those fine athletes go to class in those days?
Yes, sir.
As far as I know.
I didn't have any classes with them because they wasn't taking engineering courses.
Coach Norton, what was he like as a person?
I didn't know Coach Norton too well.
I wouldn't comment on that because I didn't know him that well.
Did you know Colonel Andy?
Yes, sir.
Colonel Andy was a nice fellow.
Describe him any more, because we don't know that much about him.
Well, I think everybody liked Colonel.
Everybody that run track liked Colonel.
I never heard of anybody criticize him.
Let me share with you this anecdote I learned from his son.
Colonel Andy played for DX Bible at a prep school in Tennessee.
And then Coach Bible got hired at Mississippi College, a little Baptist school in Clinton, Mississippi, to be the football coach.
And Colonel Andy then had graduated from high school, and so he went with Coach Bible down to Mississippi College.
The year that Colonel Andy was a senior,
They were playing what is now Mississippi State.
It was then called Mississippi A&M.
They'd only brought about 15 or 16 on the traveling squad and a bunch of them got hurt.
They were ahead 13 to nothing at the halftime.
First time they'd ever been ahead of Mississippi State.
But then when a bunch of them got hurt, they didn't have 11 guys out on the field all the time.
And while some of their people were hurt, they had only 9 and 10.
Mississippi State got ahead of them and beat them 14 to 13.
Then Coach Bible gets hired to be the coach at Texas A&M in the early 20s and he brings with him this young man Anderson who had played football for him as an assistant coach.
Two years later they're up in Dallas and they're playing a postseason game
Heine Weir, the good running back, had hurt his knee in the Texas game.
And according to Colonel Andy's son, Coach Bible turns to Colonel Andy and said, remember what happened to us over there at Mississippi College when we didn't have enough guys to get out there and play?
We didn't have 11.
They beat us.
So would you go up there in the bleachers and get King Gill to come down here and put on his uniform so if Heine Weir gets hurt, we'll have a substitute to go in for him?
So according to Colonel Andy's son, that's where the 12th man story really comes from way back over in Mississippi.
One of the interesting details I've uncovered in this.
Back to your days in the Corps, what did you and your buddies do when you were freshmen if you had an hour or two to kill in the afternoon?
What did you all do to relax?
Well, yeah, they played kind of sport.
Where where mostly did work?
Where did y'all play those sports?
What what fields?
What locations?
Well at that time I we were I was in Perrier Hall right outside Perrier Hall.
There's a back in those days was a drill field.
Mm-hmm.
It's not a drill field now, but it was a drill field and that's where we played.
Did anybody ever play on what we now call the Simpson drill field?
The one in front of the MSC?
Did intramurals ever take place there?
Or was that just only for drilling?
Well, well, that's what I'm about to feel we thought.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
So it was all right.
So it was all our sport.
All the intramural sports were played there.
Now, most of your engineering courses were held in what buildings?
Well, the chemistry building, petroleum building.
Okay.
Academic building.
That's about all I went through in the course of core.
In your first two, first year or so, if you needed some advice on what courses to take, who did you go to?
Who gave you assistance and encouragement?
Didn't have any choice.
You had to take certain courses.
Oh, okay.
All right.
Which courses were the toughest?
for you?
Calculus.
Do you remember who taught it?
No, I don't remember.
What were the easiest, the most enjoyable?
Well, the most entertaining idea, what I hadn't, and Kirbyville didn't have a chemistry department.
My freshman year in chemistry, boy, I was lost for the first six weeks.
And I had a
graduate student was teaching my chemistry course, associate professor, and he said, Richardson, have you ever had any chemistry?
And I said, no.
He said, well, I want you to come to my office.
I think I went three days a week after classes, and he tutored me, and I made a C, which I was proud of because I was failing
until he started that, and I've always looked forward to that.
Don't ask me his name because I don't remember his name.